Add security overview doc (#1099)
ubuntu/authd: docs/explanation/security.md

log in while offline.

However, to avoid locking users out of their system when they don't have a
functional network connection, by default users are allowed to log in with their
local password if the identity provider cannot be reached during login. This
means that users whose access rights have been removed can still log in with the
local password if they disconnect the network.

To enforce IdP verification even when offline, enable the
[force_provider_authentication](ref::config-force-provider-auth) setting.

### Login via SSH

#### SSH public key authentication

If SSH public key authentication is enabled, users whose access has been revoked
at the IdP can still log in using their SSH keys. This is because SSH key
authentication does not involve authd.

To prevent this, disable public key authentication for users managed by authd,
by adding the following to `/etc/ssh/sshd_config.d/authd.conf` (or directly to
`/etc/ssh/sshd_config`):

```
Match User *@example.com
    PubkeyAuthentication no
```

Replace `@example.com` with the domain of your identity provider.

TODO: We might want to refer to this from the "Log in with SSH" page, or even

> move it there and refer to it here.

Author: Something to discuss

> move it there and refer to it here.

Reviewer: I agree but it can be a separate PR.

> move it there and refer to it here.

Author: tracked in https://warthogs.atlassian.net/browse/UDENG-8258

> move it there and refer to it here.

Author: and removed the "TODO:" from the doc

# Security overview for authd

> authd provides secure identity and access management by enabling seamless

Author: yeah I just copied this first sentence from https://documentation.ubuntu.com/authd/edge-docs/explanation/authd-architecture/

I changed that sentence now, please take a look.

cloud-based authentication of Ubuntu machines.

This overview outlines the key design decisions, security practices, and
configuration options that affect the security of authd, and provides guidance
for administrators on deploying it securely.

## Secure deployment and configuration

This section provides guidance for administrators on how to configure, maintain,

> and operate authd securely.

Reviewer: Yes, this makes absolute sense.

One thing to consider is that the separation of concerns might not be clear to a reader at the outset, who may be interested in one or the other.

So this line "This overview outlines the key design decisions, security practices, and
configuration options that affect the security of authd, and provides guidance
for administrators on deploying it securely." could be rewritten to do that.

e.g.

"The first section of this overview provides guidance for administrators on deploying authd securely, and the second section explains design decisions that were made to enhance the security of authd.", or something to that effect.

In future, these could well become separate pages in the docs (not a decision for now).

Lastly, we could also make this more clear in the TOC itself. So the headers could be something like:

* Secure deployment and configuration -> Deploying authd securely as an administrator
* Security design and data handling -> How authd is designed for security

See what you think.

### Package updates

Keeping authd up to date is essential to ensure that security fixes are applied
as soon as they are available.

> An authd installation can consist of both Debian packages and snaps. Snaps are

Author: We always speculate that third-parties might create brokers some time, and those might not be shipped as snaps. However, I think we should document what we currently have and will have in the foreseeable future, so I applied your suggestion.

> An authd installation can consist of both Debian packages and snaps. Snaps are

Reviewer: Agreed: better to focus on what's available right now for a page like this. In the event a non-snap broker arrives, that will likely necessitate subtle revisions across the docs.

### Security of the identity provider

As described in the [authd architecture](authd-architecture.md) explanation,
users authenticate via an identity provider (IdP), such as Microsoft Entra ID or
Google IAM. The security of any system using authd therefore depends on the
security of the configured IdP.

Ensure that only authorized administrators have access to the IdP.
Administrators can add or remove users or change user credentials, which allows
them to grant, revoke, or modify access to systems using authd.

### Allowed users

In addition to IdP-side access control, allowed users can be restricted locally.
See the [Configure allowed users](ref::config-allowed-users) section for
details.

Ensure that only users who should have system access are configured as allowed
users.

### Local password

To improve usability, authd allows users to create a local password after
successfully authenticating with the IdP. This password can then be used for
subsequent logins without repeating the full IdP authentication flow.

#### Password strength

Strong passwords are critical to prevent unauthorized access.

> authd uses libpwquality to enforce password complexity requirements. See the

Author: so should I add link to https://github.com/libpwquality/libpwquality for now? the more useful page for users is https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/noble/man5/pwquality.conf.5.html, because that's where users learn how to configure it, but it doesn't really explain what libpwquality is (but maybe that's clear from the context: it's a library for checking password quality). we also link to the manpage in the [Configure password quality](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/authd/stable-docs/howto/configure-authd/#configure-password-quality) section which we link to here.

[Configure password quality](ref::config-pwquality) section for details.

#### Force provider authentication

> If the identity provider is reachable during login, authd verifies that the user

Author: I pushed a fixup commit which avoids abbreviating "identity provider". Please take a look, I'll squash the commit if you prefer it like that.

is still allowed to authenticate with the IdP. If the user’s account has been
disabled or removed, login is denied.

By default, if the IdP cannot be reached (for example, due to network issues),
users can still log in with their local password. This is to prevent accidental

> lockouts, but it also allows users whose access has been revoked at the IdP to

Reviewer: Ok, I see what you mean. Go with the original then.

To prevent this, disable public key authentication for users managed by authd,
by adding the following to `/etc/ssh/sshd_config.d/authd.conf` (or directly to
`/etc/ssh/sshd_config`):

```
Match User *@example.com
    PubkeyAuthentication no
```

Replace `@example.com` with the domain of your identity provider.

TODO: We might want to refer to this from the "Log in with SSH" page, or even
move it there and refer to it here.

#### SSH password authentication

As described in the [SSH configuration](ref::ssh-configuration) section, PAM
integration must be enabled in sshd:

```
UsePAM yes
KbdInteractiveAuthentication yes
```

This setup allows users managed by authd to log in through PAM.
It also enables PAM-based login for local Unix accounts, even when
`PasswordAuthentication no` is set.

Administrators who want to deviate from the default SSH configuration and
disallow password authentication for non-authd users can do so safely by using a
match block that re-enables keyboard-interactive authentication only for authd
users:

```
KbdInteractiveAuthentication no
PasswordAuthentication no

Match User *@example.com
    KbdInteractiveAuthentication yes
```

> Replace `@example.com` with the domain of your identity provider.

Reviewer: consider wrapping in a note block

### UID and GID conflicts

When a new user logs in for the first time, or when a user is added to a new
group in the identity provider (for providers that support group management; see
[Group management](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/authd/stable-docs/reference/group-management/)), 
authd automatically assigns a unique user ID (UID) and group ID (GID).

Before assigning a UID or GID, authd checks that there are no collisions with
existing users or groups on the system. However, if a user or group is later
removed, or if the entire authd database (`/var/lib/authd/authd.sqlite3`) is
deleted, previously assigned IDs can be reused for new users or groups.

This reuse can allow unintended access to files or directories owned by the old
user, as the new user would inherit their numeric UID or GID.

To avoid this risk:

> * *Do not remove* the authd database.
> 
> * When deleting users, *also remove all files and directories* they own, 
>   especially any containing sensitive data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Do not remove the authd database.
* Remove all files and directories owned by any users that you delete, 
  especially if they contain sensitive data.
```

I would favor bold instead of italics for emphasis, is people find italics too subtle.
Even better, just put what you are emphasizing at the beginning of the sentence to apply emphasis, and remove the formatting.

A tool for removing authd users along with their home directories will be
provided in the future.

## Security design and data handling

This section describes how authd is built to protect stored data and limit
system exposure.

### Stored secrets

authd stores user secrets under

> `/var/snap/authd-msentraid/current/<issuer>/<user>/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`/var/snap/authd-<broker>/current/<issuer>/<user>/`.
```

Author: good catch!

That directory is created with mode `0700`, ensuring that only root can access
it.

> The following secrets are stored:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The secrets that authd stores are described below.
```

#### Local password

A salted Argon2id hash of the local password is stored for verification. Hashing
parameters: 
* Memory: 64 KB 
* Iterations: 1 
* Parallelism: 1

#### Tokens and user information

> Tokens and user data retrieved during authentication - including the OAuth 2.0
> refresh token and OpenID Connect `UserInfo` response - are cached to support login

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tokens and user data retrieved during authentication — including the OAuth 2.0
refresh token and OpenID Connect `UserInfo` response — are cached to support login
```

I would use the (now controversial) em-dash here and not a hyphen, as hyphens are conventionally used for other purposes like "non-authd".

> via the local password. These values are currently stored in cleartext.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with the local password. These values are currently stored in cleartext.
```

We recommend enabling [full disk encryption](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/security/docs/security-features/storage/encryption-full-disk/)
to protect these secrets in case of device theft or loss.

### Sandboxing

> authd employs sandboxing to limit system exposure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authd uses sandboxing to limit system exposure:
```

> * The authd brokers run as strictly confined snaps. Their only granted interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The authd brokers run as [strictly confined](https://snapcraft.io/docs/snap-confinement) snaps. Their only granted interface
```

  is network, required to communicate with the IdP.
* The authd service uses
  [systemd sandboxing options](https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/noble/en/man5/systemd.exec.5.html#sandboxing)
  to restrict access to system resources.

Because authd operates as an authentication service, a compromise of its process

> could still lead to full root access.

Reviewer: ```
Because authd operates as an authentication service, a compromise of its process
could still lead to full root access.
```

Clarity check: is "a compromise of its process" clear here? What process?? All of its processes???

Author: done
